---
title: ORGANISATIES  
---

## GALAN GROUP

![Galan Group Logo](/images/organizations/galan-group-logo.png)

**Achieving principled performance**

Integrating governance, risk, compliance, and ethics

Governance, risk, compliance, and ethics (GRC) have now become essential items
on the agenda of management in the private, public, and semi-public sectors.
However, many organizations are still struggling to implement GRC effectively.
The Galan Group has been advising and assisting clients with GRC for more than
fifteen years. Our advice is professional and, most importantly, pragmatic.

GRC is a concept that encompasses multiple areas of expertise. It aims to
achieve goals in an effective and efficient manner, particularly in environments
with many risks and insecurities. The focus on GRC is growing due to current
economic circumstances, calling for reflection and pragmatism. Our advisors can
assist you with this.

We help you implement governance, risk management, and compliance processes
thoroughly and practically. For these processes to be successful, they must
align with the organization's objectives and the expectations of the Supervisory
Board and Management. Our advisors ensure that your organization complies with
legal requirements, internal guidelines, and values.

**How can we help you?**

**Board advice**

Over the years, we have gained significant expertise in board governance,
including composition, operation, and enhancement of board practices. For
instance, we can assist with:

_Board composition_

- Defining the optimal legal structure and preparing the necessary documentation

- Establishing, modifying, and enhancing governance and oversight frameworks

- Implementing management strategies

- Creating collective and individual profiles for directors and supervisors

- Conducting Board Performance Reviews

_Board operation_

- Remuneration advisory

- Development and implementation of board improvement plans

- Board and organizational reviews

- Creation of governance manuals

- Review and revision of legal frameworks

- Assessing and scanning corporate governance readiness and maturity

- Implementation of management systems based on corporate governance codes,
  guidelines such as ISO, OECD, and regulations from central banks

- Cultivation of teamwork and supervision

- Ensuring accountability in annual reports and corporate responsibility

- Development of governance watchlists and information plans

_Board improvement_

- Boardroom scans

- Self-evaluation and repositioning

- 'Maturity' scans and audits regarding codes, guidelines, laws and regulations

- Integrity in governance processes

- Governance documentation scans

**Board education**

It is crucial for good corporate governance to provide training and development
for both new and existing board members in the essentials of governance and the
requirements of directorship. We offer tailor-made coaching for Supervisory
Boards or individual members, which can be conducted in-house. The focus is on
practical tools, such as translating theoretical codes into good governance
practices in your organization's daily operations. This coaching can be
delivered during lunches, workshops, in-house training, and board development
programs.

**Risk management**

We assist clients in identifying, comprehending, and controlling risk, and we
help ensure a suitable balance between risks and opportunities. Our offerings
include:

- Developing risk structures

- Developing, implementing, and measuring risk frameworks, whether or not they
  are integrated into performance management

- Developing and implementing risk management systems based on the ISO 31000
  standard for risk management

- Raising awareness of risk

**Compliance**

We help businesses create and execute compliance programs to make sure the
organization stays within the limits of applicable laws and regulations. This
involves fostering a culture of "say what you do and do what you say." Some
examples of our services include:

- Advising on and resolving compliance issues

- Developing and implementing compliance projects within your organization

- Managing regulatory changes

- Designing and implementing compliance systems based on the ISO 19600 standard
  for compliance management

- Providing compliance advisory support to the internal compliance officer and
  board

- Creating and maintaining procedures and forms related to compliance

- Designing and implementing improvement plans to address negative quality
  assessment scores from external supervisory bodies

**Contact us**

The Galan Group Caribbean

Robbert Kroon Tel. +5999 5217953

Ivanka Maduro Tel. +5999 5263755

Abraham de Veerstraat 9

Willemstad, Cura√ßao, Dutch Caribbean

[office@galangroup.com](office@galangroup.com)

![Galan Group Logo](/images/organizations/galan-group-logo.png)
