---
title: ORGANISATIES  
---

## Grant Thornton Aruba: Corporate Governance Services

![Grant Thornton Logo](/images/organizations/grant-thornton-logo.png)

### Grant Thornton Aruba

The Grant Thornton Aruba office has been delivering professional services for
over 75 years. Our clients benefit from access to global resources through Grant
Thornton International Limited’s network of member and correspondent firms, all
while receiving personalized attention from our team based in Aruba. With a
workforce exceeding 50 professionals, including two partners, our Aruba office
ensures tailored service and top-tier quality in Assurance, Advisory, Tax, and
Business Process Solutions. Our dedicated team prioritizes building lasting
relationships with our clients and meticulously listens to your requirements to
deliver the utmost quality. Operating seamlessly across departments, we function
as a unified team to provide you with unparalleled quality and client
satisfaction.

### A Journey Beyond the Code 

At Grant Thornton Aruba, we believe that in today's business landscape, the
essence of good Corporate Governance (CoGo) extends far beyond a ‘tick-the-box
mentality’ and only adhering to Codes. We are committed to spreading awareness
about the crucial role of good Corporate Governance, which we believe is an
essential part of the organizational culture that must be nourished at every
level of the organization to steadily improve the organization’s performance in
such a way that its growth is also aligned with the organization’s values. 

Our approach to Corporate Governance is pragmatic: 

- We begin by understanding your business, industry, and specific governance and
  compliance needs.

- We help you develop and strengthen governance structures and practices that
  address shareholder and stakeholder expectations. 

- And we do so within the boundaries of operational and commercial
  acceptability. 

**Grant Thornton Aruba provides Corporate Governance services in five main
areas:**

**Area 1: Corporate Governance Readiness Assessment**

1. Assess an organization’s current governance practices against the new
   Corporate Governance law requirements and Corporate Governance best
   practices. This assessment will help identify areas of compliance, gaps, and
   the necessary steps to align with the new regulations.

2. Formulate recommendations to address identified gaps.

3. Develop a timeline and action plan for implementing necessary changes to
   achieve full compliance.

**Area 2: Grant Thornton Corporate Governance Maturity Model**

1. Assess an organization's current Corporate Governance Maturity level using
   the “GTA CoGo Maturity Model.”

2. Formulate a development journey plan “Beyond the Code” to elevate the
   Corporate Governance Maturity level of the organization.

3. Implement Positive Change Management to support this development journey.

**Area 3: Support organizations with the formulation of regulations, policies,
and procedures in line with the Corporate Governance laws and regulations**

We can support organizations with the formulation of, among others, these
governance documents:

- Conflict of Interest Regulations

- Selection and Appointment Procedures for Directors and Supervisory Board
  Members

- Preparation of a Succession Plan for Directors and Supervisory Board Members

- Development of Training and Education Program for Supervisory Board Members

- Development of an Introduction Program for Supervisory Board Members

- Preparation of Plan for Appointment and Reappointment of Supervisory Board
  Members and Succession Plan

- Preparation of Regulations for Task Distribution and Working Methods of the
  Supervisory Board

- Internal Procedures for Financial Information

- Preparation of Management Report (Long-term Vision and Strategy, ESG Strategy,
  Risk Assessment, Risk Management and Control, Organizational Culture, and
  Long-term Value Creation, Compliance with Code of Conduct)

- Work Plan for Internal Audit Function

- Design of Internal Risk Management and Control Systems

- Design of Multi-Year Business Plan

- Formulate job profiles for Directors and Supervisory Board Members

- Formulate Code of Conduct

- Formulate Corporate Governance Charter

**Area 4: Provide training and workshops**

Grant Thornton Aruba provides training on:

- The fundamentals of Corporate Governance

- Roles and responsibilities of Directors

- Roles and responsibilities of Supervisory Board Members

- Roles and responsibilities of the Internal Audit Function

- Positive Change Management

**Area 5: Other support**

- Support organizations with Board self-assessment for the Board of Directors
  and Supervisory Board members.

### Multidisciplinary Grant Thornton Team

At our firm, we pride ourselves on offering a comprehensive suite of corporate
governance services designed to meet the unique needs of entities across
industries. Together, our team provides a holistic approach to corporate
governance. We are committed to delivering high-quality services that not only
meet regulatory requirements but also support your strategic goals. By
partnering with us, you gain access to a multidisciplinary team dedicated to
supporting your organization’s success.

### Interested in how we can support your Corporate Governance needs?

**Contact information:**

**Hans Ruiter – Partner Tax**

**D** +297 522 1630

**M** +297 594 1647

**E [**hans.ruiter@aw.gt.com](hans.ruiter@aw.gt.com)

**Shelby Maduro – Director Advisory**

**D** +297 522 1620

**M** +297 593 3185

**E**: [shelby.maduro@aw.gt.com](shelby.maduro@aw.gt.com)

## 

Together, we’ll bridge the gap between theory and practice, empowering you to
implement robust governance frameworks in your organization.

Website:
[https://www.grantthornton.aw/events/corporate-governanCE/]([https://www.grantthornton.aw/events/corporate-governanCE/)

![Grant Thornton Logo](/images/organizations/grant-thornton-logo.png)

### Follow us on social media

Website:
[https://www.grantthornton.aw/service/advisory2/corporate-governance/](https://www.grantthornton.aw/service/advisory2/corporate-governance/)

Facebook:
[https://www.facebook.com/GrantThorntonAruba](https://www.facebook.com/GrantThorntonAruba)

LinkedIn:
[https://www.linkedin.com/company/grant-thornton-aruba/](https://www.linkedin.com/company/grant-thornton-aruba/)

Instagram:
[https://www.instagram.com/grantthorntonaw/](https://www.instagram.com/grantthorntonaw/)
