---
title: ORGANISATIES  
---

## The Themis Institute for Governance & Leadership

![Themis Institute Logo](/images/organizations/themis-institute-logo.png)

We assist organizations in enhancing the effectiveness and proper conduct of
board members and supervisory boards through counseling, skill development, and
gaining insights.

Our customized consulting and legal services are designed to align with your
board's specific goals and desires or legal requirements at any particular stage
in your governance journey.

**Governance that works**

It can be challenging to make governance work, but it needs to be taken
seriously. With a common governance framework, your managing and supervisory
boards will better understand their management and oversight roles. Based on our
philosophy of the Seven Pillars of Good Governance, we can assist you to develop
a governance framework that recognizes your organization's specific needs. It's
essential to remember that the seven pillars of good governance are not a
template or a "one size fits all" approach and will likely evolve over time
based on the developments inside or outside your organization.

**Governance fit for purpose**

Effective boards are those in which the strengths and expertise of the members
align with the needs of the organization at a given moment in time. Therefore,
in today’s fast-changing environment, there is a need for proactive and adaptive
management of the boards’ compositions and the role of the board members. We can
assist you in creating and improving your governance framework as well as
enhancing the operational effectiveness of your boards, ultimately establishing
a governance framework that is ‘fit for purpose’.

**Our solutions**

**Governance & Compliance**

We have extensive experience and resources to assist with various aspects of
board practice. Whether you want to raise awareness of governance in your
organization, implement a strong governance framework and culture, or integrate
corporate governance into your organization's daily operations, we are here to
help you achieve your objectives.

_<u>Challenges we can assist you with</u>_

- “We need to implement a new corporate structure.”

- “Our supervisory board wants to perform an evaluation.”

- “How do we implement the Corporate Governance Code?”

- “We want to create a culture within our boards that supports good governance.”

- “Is our governance framework in compliance with the applicable law and
  regulations?”

- “How can we improve the communication between the supervisory board and the
  managing board?”

- “We need to draft new articles of incorporation, board regulations, codes of
  conduct and profiles.”

- “We want to prepare a governance manual and onboarding package for incoming
  board members.”

**Growth and boardroom skill development**

Learning is not a one-time event. It involves a combination of immersive
experiences, supportive learning tools, and ongoing touchpoints. We are here to
assist your board in understanding what needs to be done, how, and why. We are
eager to help you define an effective curriculum, tools, approach, and blend of
activities to develop new skills as a director or supervisory board member.

_<u>Challenges we can assist you with</u>_

- “We need our boards to learn new skills in a more engaging way.”

- “We need to better equip our supervisory board with skills and tools to do
  their job.”

- “Our current board learning program does not support the needs of the board.”

- “We want to enhance the overall knowledge of new board members in the field of
  governance.”

- “We don’t have the internal resources to develop and execute a board learning
  program.”

- “We need to adapt to a futureproof governance framework.

**Optimization**

Traditional board improvement practices often overlook the most crucial factor:
board members who determine the success or failure of a board. We assist
managing directors and supervisory board members in collaborating to enhance
their governance structure, procedures and communication, documentation and
monitoring.

<u>Challenges we can assist you with</u>

- “We need to redesign our governance framework to comply with applicable laws
  and regulations.”

- “How can we make our board meetings more effective?”

- “We want to make our governance framework more effective.”

- “We do not comply with the Code Corporate Governance.”

- “We want to improve the effectiveness of our board meetings.”

- “What is the best way to communicate between the managing board and the
  supervisory board?”

**Knowledge sharing**

We are passionate about sharing our expertise on governance and learning from.
If you're interested in delving deeper into a specific governance topic, we can
customize workshops and lectures for your board to enhance your understanding.

<u>Challenges we can assist you with</u>

- “Can you explain how the Code Corporate Governance works?”

- “Can you explain the implications of the Code Corporate Governance for our
  organization?”

- “What does the liability aspect mean for our board, and what can we do about
  it?”

- “We are a foundation. What do we have to have in place with respect to
  governance?”

- “How do we evaluate the board and individual board members?”

- “Can you explain the applicable laws and regulations for our organization?”

- “How do we have to read our articles of incorporation and by-laws?”

**What makes us different?**

**We know what we are talking about**

For the past 25 years, we have worked with managing boards and supervisory board
members across various institutions and industries. With extensive experience
meeting the demands of the governance function, we have become specialists in
providing support to boards.

**Together**

People are more likely to support what they help build. We are excited to assist
your board members in constructing and optimizing their governance framework,
capturing their knowledge, and developing sustainable solutions.

[LET’S MEET](http://office@themis-institute.org)

**Contact us**

**Themis Institute for Governance & Leadership**

[office@themis-institute.org](office@themis-institute.org)

+599 9 522 5802

Abraham de Veerstraat 9, Willemstad, Curaçao

![Themis Institute Logo](/images/organizations/themis-institute-logo.png)
